docs(self-managed): add ECS Fargate dual-region deployment guide (#9124)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/deployment/aws/ecs-dual-region/ecs-fargate-dual-region.md

---
id: ecs-fargate-dual-region
title: "Dual-region setup (ECS Fargate)"
description: "Deploy Camunda 8 Self-Managed in an active-active dual-region configuration on AWS ECS Fargate using Terraform."
sidebar_position: 1
---

This guide walks you through deploying Camunda 8 Self-Managed in an active-active dual-region setup on AWS ECS Fargate using Terraform.

## What you'll deploy

> The reference architecture creates two symmetric ECS Fargate clusters, one per AWS region, with Zeebe brokers distributed across both regions to provide active-active resilience.

Reviewer: What does symetric means here? Maybe makes sense but just never heard this in any context ;) ?

Author: symetric means same components and configurations. Happy to use a easier wording

**What gets deployed:**

> - Eight Zeebe brokers (four per region), replication factor 4, eight partitions. Zone-aware placement (`CAMUNDA_CLUSTER_PARTITIONING_ZONEAWARE_ZONES_*`) ensures every partition has replicas in both regions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Eight Zeebe brokers (four per region), replication factor 4, eight partitions. Zone-aware placement ensures every partition has replicas in both regions (`CAMUNDA_CLUSTER_PARTITIONING_ZONEAWARE_ZONES_*`).
```

> - Two regional Connector tasks (one per region).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two Connector tasks (one per region).
```

> - One Aurora Global Database with a writer in region 0 and a cross-region reader in region 1, **or** two independent OpenSearch domains (one per region).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Seconday Storage: 
   - One Aurora Global Database with a writer in region 0 and a cross-region reader in region 1, 
   - or two independent OpenSearch domains (one per region).
```

> - Cross-region connectivity via AWS Transit Gateway or VPC Peering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Cross-region connectivity via: 
   - AWS Transit Gateway,
   - or VPC Peering.
```

    tasks1:R -- L:s3id1
    tasks1:B -- T:s3bk1
    tasks1:L -- R:peer1
```

:::warning
Reference architectures provided in this guide are not turnkey modules. Camunda recommends cloning the repository and modifying it locally. You're responsible for operating and maintaining the infrastructure. Camunda updates the reference architecture over time, and changes may not be backward compatible.
:::

## Prerequisites

### AWS permissions

Your AWS IAM principal needs permissions for the following services:

- ECS (clusters, task definitions, services)
- RDS (Aurora Global, DB clusters, parameter groups)
- EC2 (VPCs, subnets, security groups, Transit Gateway or VPC Peering)
- ELB (ALB, NLB, target groups)
- IAM (roles, policies, instance profiles)
- KMS (key creation and grants)
- S3 (bucket creation and policy)
- CloudWatch (log groups and metrics)
- Secrets Manager (secret creation)
- Route 53 Resolver — required only if you enable `enable_cross_region_dns_resolver` in the VPC layer to resolve service discovery DNS across regions: `route53resolver:CreateResolverEndpoint`, `route53resolver:CreateResolverRule`, `route53resolver:AssociateResolverRule`

### AWS service quotas

> Dual-region deployments often hit account-default quotas. Before deploying, verify and request increases as needed for both regions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dual-region deployments may require quota increases. Before deploying, verify service quotas and request increases as needed.
```

| `region_N_private_route_table_ids` | At least one private route table ID per region (for cross-region routes)                      |

### Secondary storage

| Option                | `secondary_storage_type` value | When to use                                                                                                                                                                                |
| --------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Aurora Global (RDBMS) | `rdbms`                        | Default and recommended for new deployments. Single global database with built-in cross-region replication and managed failover. Does not support Optimize.                                |
| OpenSearch            | `opensearch`                   | Required if you need Optimize. One independent OpenSearch domain per region; brokers export to both. No native cross-region replication — you're responsible for replication and failover. |

:::warning

> `secondary_storage_type` is a one-way decision. Switching after deployment requires a full export and re-import of runtime data; the reference architecture does not include an in-place migration path. Pick the storage type that matches your long-term needs before running `terraform apply`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`secondary_storage_type` is a one-way decision. Switching after deployment requires a full export and re-installation; there is no in-place migration path. Pick the storage type that matches your long-term needs before running `terraform apply`.
```

Reviewer: I would make it clear that we dont support this at the moment (probably possible but i am not aware for a support/ script for now). Seems its under investigation if we plan a ES -> rdbms support moving forward - but not yet decided.
